---
sidebar_position: 5
title: Upgrade from v5 to v6
---

# How to upgrade from version 5.x to version 6.0

eLabFTW version 6 introduces a few breaking changes impacting container deployment. This page will guide you through the changes.

## Overview

Here are the main changes:

- container port change
- container volumes change
- container user configuration change

Note: this guide assumes usage of `docker compose`. For other deployments (`podman`/`quadlets`/k8s`, ...), you will need to adapt the changes to your context.

## Making backups

Make a backup of your configuration file:

~~~bash
cp /etc/elabftw.yml /etc/elabftw.yml.v5.bak
~~~

Obviously, make sure your data backups are also functional and recent before attempting upgrade. But that is valid for any upgrade.

## Creating a dedicated user

Create a dedicated user that will run the services:

~~~bash
useradd --system --no-create-home --shell /usr/sbin/nologin elabftw-worker
id elabftw-worker
~~~

Note the user id and group id of that newly created user shown by the second command.

## Changes to the configuration file

In your configuration file (by default `/etc/elabftw.yml`, start by setting the version of the image:

~~~yaml
image: elabftw/elabimg:6.0.0
~~~

Next, add these lines below `image:`:

~~~yaml
# this could look like: user: 995:981
user: <REPLACE WITH ELABFTW-WORKER UID>:<REPLACE WITH ELABFTW-WORKER GID>
read_only: true
tmpfs:
  - /run:mode=755,uid=<REPLACE WITH ELABFTW-WORKER UID>,gid=<REPLACE WITH ELABFTW-WORKER GID>,exec,nosuid,nodev
~~~

This will make the container start and run with `elabftw-worker` user, and a read-only filesystem.

### Volumes

The `volumes:` section needs to be adjusted.

#### Nginx cache folder

We will add a folder specific for nginx. First, we create it on the host and allow our `elabftw-worker` user to write to it:

~~~bash
mkdir -p /var/elabftw/.cache/nginx
chown elabftw-worker:elabftw-worker /var/elabftw/.cache/nginx
~~~

Then in the configuration file, under `volumes:` section:

~~~yaml
  - /var/elabftw/.cache/nginx:/var/cache/nginx
~~~

#### Uploads folder

Change this line:

~~~yaml
- /var/elabftw/web:/elabftw/uploads
~~~

To this line:

~~~yaml
- /var/elabftw/web:/var/lib/elabftw/uploads
~~~

Note: first part might differ on your setup obviously. The main point is that the uploaded files are now expected to be in `/var/lib/elabftw/uploads`.

Adjust the ownership with our new user:

~~~bash
chown -R elabftw-worker:elabftw-worker /var/elabftw/web
~~~

#### Exports folder

The `exports` folder will hold the files generated by the Export function of eLabFTW. It must also be bind-mounted on the host. It is possible that you did not bind-mount that folder previously, as it wasn't a strict requirement. So if you don't see the line, add it.

~~~yaml
- /var/elabftw/exports:/var/lib/elabftw/exports
~~~

If the line was present, change `/elabftw/exports` to `/var/lib/elabftw/exports`.

Adjust the ownership with our new user:

~~~bash
chown -R elabftw-worker:elabftw-worker /var/elabftw/exports
~~~

### Ports

In the `ports:` section, we will need to change internal port `443` to `8080`.

Change this line:

~~~yaml
ports:
  - '443:443'
~~~

To this line:

~~~yaml
ports:
  - '443:8080'
~~~

It is the right-hand side that needs to be modified: the listening port in the container.

### Environment

Some environment variables are no longer relevant, and should be removed from your configuration. Remove these environment variables:

~~~
ENABLE_IPV6
ELABFTW_USER
ELABFTW_GROUP
ELABFTW_USERID
ELABFTW_GROUPID
INDIGO_URL
SILENT_INIT
USE_INDIGO
~~~

### No IPV6 in container

We removed support for IPv6 in container. You can still use IPv6 to expose the service to the outside world, but the `nginx` process inside the container doesn't need to listen on IPv6 network stack.

### Chem-plugin

The `chem-plugin` addon used to run two services: one for the chemical structure editor, one for the fingerprinting of imported compounds. In version 6, only one service runs (the fingerprinting service). The other service is now running client-side as WASM component in the browser.

As such, where you previously needed to export ports: 8080 and 8000, only port `8000` needs to be exposed now. The default configuration doesn't expose ports outside, so this change doesn't need to be reflected in the new configuration anyway.

Here is the new recommended configuration for `chem-plugin`:

~~~yaml
chem-plugin:
  # versions of this image follows elabftw versioning
  image: elabftw/chem-plugin:6.0.0
  container_name: chem-plugin
  restart: always
  read_only: true
  cap_drop:
      - ALL
  tmpfs:
    - /tmp
  security_opt:
    - no-new-privileges:true
  networks:
    - elabftw-net
~~~

Once all is in place, restart the container with: `elabctl refresh`.
